In this review, the impact of enteral nutrition on mortality was equivalent for patients with dementia, without dementia or diagnosed with other neurological conditions. However, patients with dementia had decreased mortality compared to patients with a stroke and increased mortality compared to patients with tumours. Risk factors for poor survival included decreased or decreasing serum albumin levels, increasing age or over 80 years, and male gender. Limited evidence on pneumonia was found, although did not impacted on mortality. No studies explored the development or healing of pressure sores or quality of life.
Previous studies have failed to demonstrate enteral nutrition for patients with dementia prolongs survival [18,35,36,37]. Current studies suggest mortality of patients with dementia receiving enteral nutrition when compared to other conditions is dependent on the comparativeness of these conditions, including stage of the disease and long term prognosis. The importance of the timing of the decision with regards to the prognosis of the patient with dementia may be an influential factor, as enteral nutrition is more frequently commenced in advanced dementia [33]. Patients with advanced dementia may exhibit a low level of functionality over a long period of time, which contributes to general frailty [38]. Illness trajectories and mortality in dementia are difficult to predict due to low functionality and frailty, which leads to discussions regarding enteral nutrition in the advanced stages of dementia as end of life is difficult to recognize [38,39]. Therefore, the possibility of some studies to include older patients with more advanced dementia and the tendency to commence enteral nutrition in the late stages of the disease process may have implications for mortality rates.
In the current review a decreased or decreasing serum albumin was a predictor of mortality [29,31,32]. Decreased serum albumin levels (<3.0 mg/dL) have been associated with increased mortality in enteral nutrition where analysis did not differentiate the diagnosis of patients [40,41]. Evidence for the impact of the diagnosis of dementia and decreasing serum albumin levels for patients receiving enteral nutrition is inconsistent. One study found serum albumin levels did not predict survival in patients with dementia, but did predict survival in patients without dementia receiving enteral nutrition [42]. The impact of serum albumin levels in patients not receiving enteral nutrition needs to be considered, as decreased serum albumin in critical illness was associated with increased mortality [43]. In the healthy elderly serum albumin levels decreased with age and were predictive of mortality independent of know disease [44]. Evidence regarding decreased or decreasing serum albumin levels suggests an impact on mortality and therefore, needs to be considered in the provision of enteral nutrition regardless of diagnosis but with consideration of age.
Aspiration pneumonia has been a recognised complication of advanced dementia and enteral nutrition administered via PEG tubes [3]. Finucane et al. [13] reported no randomised controlled trials had explored the reduction of aspiration pneumonia following the provision of enteral nutrition via a PEG tube. In the current review one observational study reported aspiration pneumonia occurrence at 5%, which was comparable for patients with and without dementia and was not a risk factor of mortality [31]. Tentatively enteral nutrition delivered through a PEG tube does not increase the risk of aspiration for patients with dementia compared to rates of aspiration pneumonia of other disease cohorts.
The development and healing of pressure sores was not explored by the studies included in this review. However, Martin et al. [27] explored the impact of enteral nutrition administered via nasogastric tubes and PEG tubes reported pressure and reported that a fifth of patients developed a pressure sore during the provision of enteral nutrition, and the healing of pressure sores was correlated with increased mortality. The development and lack of healing of pressure sores may correlate with hypoalbuminemia, as this is a risk factor for the development of pressure sores and increases resistance to treatment [45,46]. No further studies have explored the correlation between serum albumin and pressure sores in patients with dementia receiving enteral nutrition. Martin et al. [27] reported enteral nutrition in patients with dementia was effective in preserving but not significantly improving serum albumin levels.
Limitations of the studies included in this review need to be acknowledged. Different clinical practices and guidelines across continents may impact on the results of studies included. Practices across continents were difficult to identify only three studies reported PEG placement procedures and none clarified/defined enteral nutrition. Prevalence of enteral nutrition in patients with dementia in Japan may be higher than Western populations due to current guidelines. In Japan guidelines compiled under the supervision of the Japan Gastroenterology Endoscopy Society recommend PEG insertion for patients who cannot maintain their nutrition due to cerebrovascular disease or dementia [47]. The impact of these guidelines may be the earlier insertion of PEG tubes and the commencement of enteral nutrition in patients with dementia leading to longer survival rates [31]. Higaki et al. [31] reported survival at 12 months of 51% for patients with dementia of which 20% were still alive three years, compared to 41% of patients with dementia at 12 months in a study completed in Sweden [33]. However, no longitudinal data was reported outside Japan and the challenges to this guidance and Japanese health-care system reforms may impact on this prevalence [28].
Further limitations of the studies include small sample sizes and different categorization of conditions. Dementia was categorized as a separate neurological condition in some studies, but included with other neurological conditions in further studies. Diagnosis was generalised in some studies to those with and without dementia, and more detailed in further studies with all conditions categorized and therefore, direct comparison and interpretation of results is difficult.
Ethical considerations of insertion of a PEG in a patient with dementia are important. ESPEN and NICE guidelines do not recommend enteral nutrition in patients with advanced dementia and only occasionally in patients in the earlier stages of dementia. Enteral nutrition is recommended only to ensure adequate provision of nutritional needs, when under-nutrition is caused by reversible conditions other than the dementia [48]. However, diagnostic overshadowing, a tendency to attribute all symptoms to dementia thereby leaving a co-existing conditions undiagnosed has been recognised and needs to be continually challenged [49].
Alzheimer’s Society supports the importance of quality of life rather than length of life. For the person with dementia decreased quality of life has been associated with behavioural and psychological disturbances, but no associations with dysphagia or cognition has been demonstrated to date [50]. A recent a recent review by the Royal College of Physicians suggests the need for reluctance to commence enteral nutrition in dementia, however state this cannot be translated into a blanket ban [51]. A decision-making algorithm integrating medical and ethic dimensions regarding enteral nutrition in dementia has been developed and may be helpful to healthcare professionals faced with this ethical dilemma [52].
5. Conclusions.
The studies included in this systematic review challenge the traditional view that enteral nutrition administered through a PEG tube increases mortality in patients with dementia. The recommendations from this review include the need for a holistic assessment of patients with dementia when contemplating PEG insertion and enteral nutrition. A holistic assessment would include: the patients’ diagnosis including comorbidities, current stage and impact of dementia on the need for enteral nutrition, age and nutritional parameters. The impact of enteral nutrition on quality of life for patients with dementia remains unclear, although complications are acknowledged. Enteral nutrition within end of life care is not recommended, although this review acknowledges recognising end of life within dementia is problematic. A further recommendation is early discussions with patients with dementia and their family regarding nutrition needs in advanced dementia and the documentation of the results of these discussions. However, decision making regarding PEG insertion and enteral nutrition in patients with dementia currently remains ethically challenging and should involve discussions around appropriate end of life care.
Author Contributions.
Both authors contributed significantly in all aspects of the manuscript, they both read and approved the final copy.
Conflicts of Interest.
The authors declare no conflict of interest.
