
This descriptive, cross-sectional study was conducted in April and May 2020. The study participants included all the nurses working in the medical departments related to COVID-19 in medical centers affiliated with Zanjan University of Medical Sciences, Iran. The research environment included 3 hospitals that were designated centers for the acceptance of COVID-19 patients, and the sampling method used was census. The study inclusion criteria included willingness to participate in the research, a Bachelor's degree in nursing or higher, and at least 6 months of clinical experience. The exclusion criteria were a history of physical or psychiatric illness and medication intake for this disease based on self-reporting. After obtaining permission from the ethics committee, the researcher referred to the hospitals in which the research was conducted and invited research units that met the inclusion criteria to take part in the study. After obtaining written consent, 394 nurses entered the study. Due to unwillingness and inaccuracy in completing the questionnaires, 54 people (13%) were excluded from the study, and finally, 340 acceptable questionnaires were obtained.

The data collection tools included a 2-part questionnaire consisting of a demographic characteristics questionnaire and the Health Anxiety Inventory (HAI). The demographic characteristics questionnaire included questions regarding age, gender, marital status, parenting, family relationship, economic situation, education level, job category, work experience, and service ward. The HAI is used to measure health anxiety. The short form of this questionnaire was first developed by Salkoskis and Warwick (2002), and included 18 items scored on a 4-point Likert scale ranging from 0 to 3 in the 3 components of worry about health (7 items; 0–21 points), awareness of bodily sensations or changes (6 items; 0–18 points), and feared consequences of having an illness (5 items; 0-15 points). The total score range of this questionnaire is 0–54 points. Scores of 0–18, 18–36, and above 36 indicate a low, moderate, and high health anxiety level. The validity and reliability of this questionnaire have been evaluated and confirmed in the studies by Salkovskis and Warwick,[10] Abramowitz et al.,[11] and Nargesi et al.[12] The data collected were analyzed using descriptive indicators and the nonparametric tests of Man-Whitney and Kruskal–Wallis in SPSS software (version 17, SPSS Inc., Chicago, IL, USA) at a significant level of 0.05.