The primary aim of this study was to examine the association between exposure to violence over the past 12 months with QoL and psychological distress among women who reported violence in close relationships compared to women who had not experienced violence.

The results of our study showed that 7.6% of women have experienced some type of violence in close relationships in recent years. Exposure to physical violence alone was the most common form of violence. Violence victims were more likely to be younger, have low or no education, and be single [15, 19, 43]. Moreover, cannabis use and excessive alcohol consumption were more common in violence victims. These findings are consistent with earlier findings in other research [44, 45].

We found similar patterns for QoL and psychosocial distress. Our results using both generic QoL measures and mental health instruments fit well with the results from previous studies evaluating effects on QoL and mental health separately [43, 46, 47]. A recent Spanish study also found that current physical or sexual violence was strongly associated with worse health outcomes, current emotional violence being the next strongest association [48].

One of the most important findings was that combinations of violence types had a stronger association with lower QoL and greater psychological distress than exposure to a single type. The scarcity of research in this area may reflect the challenges of conceptualising QoL in relation to the experience of violence, particularly in defining emotional violence [49]. Violence is a complex phenomenon, and different types of violence impact negatively on different dimensions of well-being.

Our focus was not only on violence by intimate partners, but also by perpetrators in other close relationships. The mean score of QoL, as measured by the EUROHIS-QOL 8-item index, was significantly lower among victims of violence in close relationships compared with victims of violence committed by strangers. The definition of “family” or “partner” is quite challenging nowadays and means different things in different cultures. Our focus on ‘close relationships’ allowed us to assess the effects of violence between people who are significant to each other.

Although the number of studies using a narrow definition of violence in close relationships (e.g., current partner) has increased, little is known on the association between QoL and different victim-perpetrator relationships. Our findings suggest that we need a different strategy to prevent or intervene early against violence in close relationships, since it seems to be more pervasive and have more wide-ranging consequences than violence committed by strangers.

The main strength of this study is that we had a large, nationally representative, population-based sample with a relatively high response rate, rather than observations from small populations in clinical settings. Thus, our study provides a relatively complete picture of violence victims compared to other studies, since victims might not disclose experiences of violence to public institutions but may have reported them in a self-administered survey.

All measurement variable scales (EUROHIS-QOL 8-item, MHI-5 and AUDIT-C) used in this study have been validated in previous studies [33, 34, 40]. To the best of our knowledge, several studies have applied the WHO-BREF [50, 51], whereas no study has used the EUROHIS-QOL 8-item index among violence victims. Due to its brevity, we assumed that it might be difficult to capture strong associations between violence and mental health, but our results seem to indicate that the EUROHIS-QOL 8-item index is useful for assessing associations between violence and QoL.

We included substance use (cannabis use and excessive alcohol consumption) as important control variables, because violence exposure is associated with substance abuse [38, 44, 52]. Our results highlighted that violence victims had both high alcohol consumption and cannabis use compared to women unexposed to recent violence.