"She's a really important person in my life, and she's a really important part of my family," says Roberts, who was one of the first few hundred babies to be born via modern surrogacy in the UK. When outsiders are confused about her parentage, she draws them a little family tree. To her, it's simple: "[There's] my mum, and then I've got my surrogate, and they're different people."

Surrogacy, which involves a woman carrying a child for another person or couple, is banned in its commercial form in Britain, but allowed as a non-profit arrangement. According to the organisation that facilitated Roberts' surrogacy, demand now far outstrips the number of willing surrogates. Data also shows the number of people using fertility treatments with surrogates has jumped by as much as 22% in a year. Some, like Roberts' parents, come to it after struggling with infertility. For others, such as gay couples, it is one of the few routes to parenthood, alongside adoption.

Like every new family form that emerged in recent decades, surrogacy has caused much controversy – including over the potential psychological impact on the children born of it. That discomfort around new types of family is partly linked to a sense of uncertainty. Whether created with the help of new technologies or thanks to social change, these families often face the accusation that they are risking the wellbeing of future generations. After all, if no one has ever conceived or raised a child this way before, then how can we possibly predict the consequences?

In reality, we know far more about new family forms than is often assumed. For a start, many once-pioneering families now span several generations, and have vital lessons to share. In addition, while each family is different, researchers have uncovered certain patterns which appear to apply to all families – including, possibly, ones currently unknown.

As a result, we have a surprisingly detailed picture of families that were once seen as niche, but that are going to define the 21st Century. After all, unconventional parenthood is on the rise. Same-sex couples make up an increasingly large share of adoptive parents, and the use of donor eggs and sperm is increasing as older couples and single people choose parenthood, to name just two growing trends. As diverse as these families are, many grapple with similar questions, such as how to tell the children about their origin, or how to best manage relationships with third parties, be they surrogates or donors. Thanks to decades of research, many of those questions can now be answered.