Due to a global aging population the incidence and prevalence of dementia is predicted to rise worldwide, with an estimated 81 million people diagnosed with dementia by 2040 [1]. Dementia is an umbrella term for a number of specific conditions which are progressive in nature and impact on multiple areas of functioning including decline in memory, reasoning, communication skills and ability to carry out daily activities [2].
A common experience for people with dementia is the development of eating difficulties leading to problems such as malnutrition and weigh loss [3,4]. The severity and progression of dementia is closely related to weight loss [5,6]. In the early stages of dementia eating difficulties are attributed to olfactory and taste dysfunction, executive planning difficulties, attention deficits, dyspraxia, agnosia and behavioural problems [7]. In advanced stages of dementia oral and pharyngeal phase dysphagia may be present leading to the inability to coordinate chewing and swallowing, and disruption of the food bolus from the oropharynx into the oesophagus without aspiration [8]. Reduced nutrition has negative outcomes for patients with dementia including higher morbidity and mortality, reduced quality of life and increased carer burden [9,10,11].
An intervention for long term eating difficulties across different health conditions is the provision of enteral nutrition through a Percutaneous Endoscopic Gastrostomy (PEG) tube. The provision of enteral nutrition is both to provide complete nutrition and improve the patient’s quality of life [12]. A systematic review in 1999 explored the impact of enteral nutrition in patients with advanced dementia and found no improvements in the rates of aspiration, pressures sores or mortality [13]. No data was found on quality of life, although many complications were reported including: gastric perforation, gastric prolapse, aspiration, diarrhoea, gastrointestinal bleeding, nauseas and vomiting, fluid overload and loss of social aspects of feeding. Finucane et al. [13] concluded enteral nutrition for patients with dementia should be actively discouraged.
A further review in 2001 explored nutritional parameters, quality of life and mortality of older people with dementia receiving enteral nutrition [14]. A small number of studies (n = 3) found improvements in nutritional parameters and an increased albumin was associated with decreased mortality. Dharmarajan et al. [14] found quality of life was difficult to analyse in this population as patients with advanced dementia could not narrate their subjective feelings, and family members reported conflicting opinions. Mortality ranged from 11%–27% across studies at 30 days post insertion of a PEG and commencement of enteral nutrition. However, mortality was not uniformed: older patients, men and patients with an acute illness had higher mortality than women and African-American patients. Dharmarajan et al. [14] recommended caution in decisions regarding enteral nutrition in older people with dementia.
A more recent review in 2009 reported no significant association between enteral nutrition and decreased mortality in older patients with dementia [15]. Secondary outcomes of weight loss, Body Mass Index (BMI), haemocrit and cholesterol were not significantly different between those receiving enteral nutrition to those who were not, albumin levels were significantly decreased in patients receiving enteral nutrition [15]. No studies in this review explored the impact of enteral nutrition on quality of life, behavioural or psychiatric symptoms of dementia. However, one study documented the use of restraint, with 71% of patients being physically restrained to prevent removal of a PEG compared to 55% of those not receiving enteral nutrition [16]. Sampson et al. [15] conclude that there is insufficient evidence to suggest enteral nutrition in patients with advanced dementia is beneficial.
Clinical guidance reflects the evidence to date, National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (NICE) guidance [17] suggests enteral nutrition may be considered if dysphagia in a patient with dementia is deemed to be transient, but should not generally be used for patients with advanced dementia who are disinclined to eat or have permanent dysphagia. European Society of Parenteral and Enteral Nutrition (ESPEN) are shortly to realise their guidelines on Nutrition in Dementia [7]. ESPEN confirm the use of enteral nutrition in patients with mild or moderate dementia if malnutrition is predominantly the cause of a reversible condition and only for a limited time. Reversible conditions are secondary concurrent illnesses such as depression, infection, over use of sedatives, pain or poor oral health. ESPEN do not recommend the use of enteral nutrition in the terminal phase of dementia, although acknowledge decisions are unique for each patient with dementia and should take into consideration the patient’s general prognosis and preferences.