Ancient
Main articles: Ancient Egyptian technology, Ancient Greek technology, and Ancient Roman technology

The wheel was invented circa 4000 BCE.
Meanwhile, humans were learning to harness other forms of energy. The earliest known use of wind power is the sailing ship; the earliest record of a ship under sail is that of a Nile boat dating to the 8th-millennium BCE.[38] From prehistoric times, Egyptians probably used the power of the annual flooding of the Nile to irrigate their lands, gradually learning to regulate much of it through purposely built irrigation channels and "catch" basins. The ancient Sumerians in Mesopotamia used a complex system of canals and levees to divert water from the Tigris and Euphrates rivers for irrigation.[39]

According to archaeologists, the wheel was invented around 4000 BCE probably independently and nearly simultaneously in Mesopotamia (in present-day Iraq), the Northern Caucasus (Maykop culture) and Central Europe.[40] Estimates on when this may have occurred range from 5500 to 3000 BCE with most experts putting it closer to 4000 BCE.[41] The oldest artifacts with drawings depicting wheeled carts date from about 3500 BCE;[42] however, the wheel may have been in use for millennia before these drawings were made. More recently, the oldest-known wooden wheel in the world was found in the Ljubljana Marsh of Slovenia.[43]

The invention of the wheel revolutionized trade and war. It did not take long to discover that wheeled wagons could be used to carry heavy loads. The ancient Sumerians used the potter's wheel and may have invented it.[44] A stone pottery wheel found in the city-state of Ur dates to around 3429 BCE,[45] and even older fragments of wheel-thrown pottery have been found in the same area.[45] Fast (rotary) potters' wheels enabled early mass production of pottery, but it was the use of the wheel as a transformer of energy (through water wheels, windmills, and even treadmills) that revolutionized the application of nonhuman power sources. The first two-wheeled carts were derived from travois[46] and were first used in Mesopotamia and Iran in around 3000 BCE.[46]

The oldest known constructed roadways are the stone-paved streets of the city-state of Ur, dating to circa 4000 BCE[47] and timber roads leading through the swamps of Glastonbury, England, dating to around the same time period.[47] The first long-distance road, which came into use around 3500 BCE,[47] spanned 1,500 miles from the Persian Gulf to the Mediterranean Sea,[47] but was not paved and was only partially maintained.[47] In around 2000 BCE, the Minoans on the Greek island of Crete built a fifty-kilometer (thirty-mile) road leading from the palace of Gortyn on the south side of the island, through the mountains, to the palace of Knossos on the north side of the island.[47] Unlike the earlier road, the Minoan road was completely paved.[47]


Photograph of the Pont du Gard in France, one of the most famous ancient Roman aqueducts[48]
Ancient Minoan private homes had running water.[49] A bathtub virtually identical to modern ones was unearthed at the Palace of Knossos.[49][50] Several Minoan private homes also had toilets, which could be flushed by pouring water down the drain.[49] The ancient Romans had many public flush toilets,[50] which emptied into an extensive sewage system.[50] The primary sewer in Rome was the Cloaca Maxima;[50] construction began on it in the sixth century BCE and it is still in use today.[50]

The ancient Romans also had a complex system of aqueducts,[48] which were used to transport water across long distances.[48] The first Roman aqueduct was built in 312 BCE.[48] The eleventh and final ancient Roman aqueduct was built in 226 CE.[48] Put together, the Roman aqueducts extended over 450 kilometers,[48] but less than seventy kilometers of this was above ground and supported by arches.[48]

Medieval
Main articles: Medieval technology and Renaissance technology
Innovations continued through the Middle Ages with innovations such as silk-manufacture (introduced into Europe after centuries of development in Asia), the horse collar and horseshoes in the first few hundred years after the 5th-century fall of the Roman Empire. Medieval technology saw the use of simple machines (such as the lever, the screw, and the pulley) being combined to form more complicated tools, such as the wheelbarrow, windmills and clocks, and a system of universities developed and spread scientific ideas and practices. The Renaissance era produced many innovations, including the printing press (which facilitated the communication of knowledge), and technology became increasingly associated with science, beginning a cycle of mutual advancement. Advances in technology in this era allowed a more reliable supply of food, followed by the wider availability of consumer goods.

Modern
Main articles: Industrial Revolution, Second Industrial Revolution, and History of computing hardware

The automobile revolutionized personal transportation.
Starting in the United Kingdom in the 18th century, the Industrial Revolution was a period of great technological discovery, particularly in the areas of agriculture, manufacturing, mining, metallurgy, and transport, driven by the discovery of steam power and the widespread application of the factory system. Technology took another step in a second industrial revolution (c.  1870 to c.  1914) with the harnessing of electricity to allow such innovations as the electric motor, light bulb, and countless others. Scientific advances and the discovery of new concepts later allowed for powered flight and developments in medicine, chemistry, physics, and engineering. The rise in technology has led to skyscrapers and broad urban areas whose inhabitants rely on motors to transport them and their food supplies. Communication improved with the invention of the telegraph, telephone, radio and television. The late-19th and early-20th centuries saw a revolution in transportation with the invention of the airplane and automobile.

The 20th century brought a host of innovations. In physics, the discovery of nuclear fission has led to both nuclear weapons and nuclear power. Computers were invented and later miniaturized using transistors and integrated circuits. Information technology, particularly the optical fiber and optical amplifiers that led to the birth of the Internet, which ushered in the Information Age. Humans started to explore space with satellites (late 1950s, later used for telecommunication) and in crewed missions (1960s) going all the way to the moon. In medicine, this era brought innovations such as open-heart surgery and later stem-cell therapy along with new medications and treatments using genomics.

Complex manufacturing and construction techniques and organizations are needed to make and maintain some of the newer technologies, and entire industries have arisen to support and develop succeeding generations of increasingly more complex tools. Modern technology increasingly relies on training and education – their designers, builders, maintainers, and users often require sophisticated general and specific training. Moreover, these technologies have become so complex that entire fields have developed to support them, including engineering, medicine, and computer science; and other fields have become more complex, such as construction, transportation, and architecture.