Metabolism
Further information: Bioenergetics

Example of an enzyme-catalysed exothermic reaction
All cells require energy to sustain cellular processes. Energy is the capacity to do work, which, in thermodynamics, can be calculated using Gibbs free energy. According to the first law of thermodynamics, energy is conserved, i.e., cannot be created or destroyed. Hence, chemical reactions in a cell do not create new energy but are involved instead in the transformation and transfer of energy.[55] Nevertheless, all energy transfers lead to some loss of usable energy, which increases entropy (or state of disorder) as stated by the second law of thermodynamics. As a result, an organism requires continuous input of energy to maintain a low state of entropy. In cells, energy can be transferred as electrons during redox (reduction–oxidation) reactions, stored in covalent bonds, and generated by the movement of ions (e.g., hydrogen, sodium, potassium) across a membrane.

Metabolism is the set of life-sustaining chemical reactions in organisms. The three main purposes of metabolism are: the conversion of food to energy to run cellular processes; the conversion of food/fuel to building blocks for proteins, lipids, nucleic acids, and some carbohydrates; and the elimination of metabolic wastes. These enzyme-catalyzed reactions allow organisms to grow and reproduce, maintain their structures, and respond to their environments. Metabolic reactions may be categorized as catabolic—the breaking down of compounds (for example, the breaking down of glucose to pyruvate by cellular respiration); or anabolic—the building up (synthesis) of compounds (such as proteins, carbohydrates, lipids, and nucleic acids). Usually, catabolism releases energy, and anabolism consumes energy.

The chemical reactions of metabolism are organized into metabolic pathways, in which one chemical is transformed through a series of steps into another chemical, each step being facilitated by a specific enzyme. Enzymes are crucial to metabolism because they allow organisms to drive desirable reactions that require energy that will not occur by themselves, by coupling them to spontaneous reactions that release energy. Enzymes act as catalysts—they allow a reaction to proceed more rapidly without being consumed by it—by reducing the amount of activation energy needed to convert reactants into products. Enzymes also allow the regulation of the rate of a metabolic reaction, for example in response to changes in the cell's environment or to signals from other cells.

Cellular respiration is a set of metabolic reactions and processes that take place in the cells of organisms to convert chemical energy from nutrients into adenosine triphosphate (ATP), and then release waste products.[56] The reactions involved in respiration are catabolic reactions, which break large molecules into smaller ones, releasing energy because weak high-energy bonds, in particular in molecular oxygen,[57] are replaced by stronger bonds in the products. Respiration is one of the key ways a cell releases chemical energy to fuel cellular activity. The overall reaction occurs in a series of biochemical steps, some of which are redox reactions. Although cellular respiration is technically a combustion reaction, it clearly does not resemble one when it occurs in a cell because of the slow, controlled release of energy from the series of reactions.

Sugar in the form of glucose is the main nutrient used by animal and plant cells in respiration. Cellular respiration involving oxygen is called aerobic respiration, which has four stages: glycolysis, citric acid cycle (or Krebs cycle), electron transport chain, and oxidative phosphorylation.[58] Glycolysis is a metabolic process that occurs in the cytoplasm whereby glucose is converted into two pyruvates, with two net molecules of ATP being produced at the same time.[58] Each pyruvate is then oxidized into acetyl-CoA by the pyruvate dehydrogenase complex, which also generates NADH and carbon dioxide. Acetyl-Coa enters the citric acid cycle, which takes places inside the mitochondrial matrix. At the end of the cycle, the total yield from 1 glucose (or 2 pyruvates) is 6 NADH, 2 FADH2, and 2 ATP molecules. Finally, the next stage is oxidative phosphorylation, which in eukaryotes, occurs in the mitochondrial cristae. Oxidative phosphorylation comprises the electron transport chain, which is a series of four protein complexes that transfer electrons from one complex to another, thereby releasing energy from NADH and FADH2 that is coupled to the pumping of protons (hydrogen ions) across the inner mitochondrial membrane (chemiosmosis), which generates a proton motive force.[58] Energy from the proton motive force drives the enzyme ATP synthase to synthesize more ATPs by phosphorylating ADPs. The transfer of electrons terminates with molecular oxygen being the final electron acceptor.

If oxygen were not present, pyruvate would not be metabolized by cellular respiration but undergoes a process of fermentation. The pyruvate is not transported into the mitochondrion but remains in the cytoplasm, where it is converted to waste products that may be removed from the cell. This serves the purpose of oxidizing the electron carriers so that they can perform glycolysis again and removing the excess pyruvate. Fermentation oxidizes NADH to NAD+ so it can be re-used in glycolysis. In the absence of oxygen, fermentation prevents the buildup of NADH in the cytoplasm and provides NAD+ for glycolysis. This waste product varies depending on the organism. In skeletal muscles, the waste product is lactic acid. This type of fermentation is called lactic acid fermentation. In strenuous exercise, when energy demands exceed energy supply, the respiratory chain cannot process all of the hydrogen atoms joined by NADH. During anaerobic glycolysis, NAD+ regenerates when pairs of hydrogen combine with pyruvate to form lactate. Lactate formation is catalyzed by lactate dehydrogenase in a reversible reaction. Lactate can also be used as an indirect precursor for liver glycogen. During recovery, when oxygen becomes available, NAD+ attaches to hydrogen from lactate to form ATP. In yeast, the waste products are ethanol and carbon dioxide. This type of fermentation is known as alcoholic or ethanol fermentation. The ATP generated in this process is made by substrate-level phosphorylation, which does not require oxygen.

Photosynthesis

Photosynthesis changes sunlight into chemical energy, splits water to liberate O2, and fixes CO2 into sugar.
Photosynthesis is a process used by plants and other organisms to convert light energy into chemical energy that can later be released to fuel the organism's metabolic activities via cellular respiration. This chemical energy is stored in carbohydrate molecules, such as sugars, which are synthesized from carbon dioxide and water.[59][60][61] In most cases, oxygen is also released as a waste product. Most plants, algae, and cyanobacteria perform photosynthesis, which is largely responsible for producing and maintaining the oxygen content of the Earth's atmosphere, and supplies most of the energy necessary for life on Earth.[62]

Photosynthesis has four stages: Light absorption, electron transport, ATP synthesis, and carbon fixation.[58] Light absorption is the initial step of photosynthesis whereby light energy is absorbed by chlorophyll pigments attached to proteins in the thylakoid membranes. The absorbed light energy is used to remove electrons from a donor (water) to a primary electron acceptor, a quinone designated as Q. In the second stage, electrons move from the quinone primary electron acceptor through a series of electron carriers until they reach a final electron acceptor, which is usually the oxidized form of NADP+, which is reduced to NADPH, a process that takes place in a protein complex called photosystem I (PSI). The transport of electrons is coupled to the movement of protons (or hydrogen) from the stroma to the thylakoid membrane, which forms a pH gradient across the membrane as hydrogen becomes more concentrated in the lumen than in the stroma. This is analogous to the proton-motive force generated across the inner mitochondrial membrane in aerobic respiration.[58]

During the third stage of photosynthesis, the movement of protons down their concentration gradients from the thylakoid lumen to the stroma through the ATP synthase is coupled to the synthesis of ATP by that same ATP synthase.[58] The NADPH and ATPs generated by the light-dependent reactions in the second and third stages, respectively, provide the energy and electrons to drive the synthesis of glucose by fixing atmospheric carbon dioxide into existing organic carbon compounds, such as ribulose bisphosphate (RuBP) in a sequence of light-independent (or dark) reactions called the Calvin cycle.[63]

Cell signaling
Cell communication (or signaling) is the ability of cells to receive, process, and transmit signals with its environment and with itself.[64][65] Signals can be non-chemical such as light, electrical impulses, and heat, or chemical signals (or ligands) that interact with receptors, which can be found embedded in the cell membrane of another cell or located deep inside a cell.[66][65] There are generally four types of chemical signals: autocrine, paracrine, juxtacrine, and hormones.[66] In autocrine signaling, the ligand affects the same cell that releases it. Tumor cells, for example, can reproduce uncontrollably because they release signals that initiate their own self-division. In paracrine signaling, the ligand diffuses to nearby cells and affect them. For example, brain cells called neurons release ligands called neurotransmitters that diffuse across a synaptic cleft to bind with a receptor on an adjacent cell such as another neuron or muscle cell. In juxtacrine signaling, there is direct contact between the signaling and responding cells. Finally, hormones are ligands that travel through the circulatory systems of animals or vascular systems of plants to reach their target cells. Once a ligand binds with a receptor, it can influence the behavior of another cell, depending on the type of receptor. For instance, neurotransmitters that bind with an inotropic receptor can alter the excitability of a target cell. Other types of receptors include protein kinase receptors (e.g., receptor for the hormone insulin) and G protein-coupled receptors. Activation of G protein-coupled receptors can initiate second messenger cascades. The process by which a chemical or physical signal is transmitted through a cell as a series of molecular events is called signal transduction

Cell cycle

In meiosis, the chromosomes duplicate and the homologous chromosomes exchange genetic information during meiosis I. The daughter cells divide again in meiosis II to form haploid gametes.
The cell cycle is a series of events that take place in a cell that cause it to divide into two daughter cells. These events include the duplication of its DNA and some of its organelles, and the subsequent partitioning of its cytoplasm into two daughter cells in a process called cell division.[67] In eukaryotes (i.e., animal, plant, fungal, and protist cells), there are two distinct types of cell division: mitosis and meiosis.[68] Mitosis is part of the cell cycle, in which replicated chromosomes are separated into two new nuclei. Cell division gives rise to genetically identical cells in which the total number of chromosomes is maintained. In general, mitosis (division of the nucleus) is preceded by the S stage of interphase (during which the DNA is replicated) and is often followed by telophase and cytokinesis; which divides the cytoplasm, organelles and cell membrane of one cell into two new cells containing roughly equal shares of these cellular components. The different stages of mitosis all together define the mitotic phase of an animal cell cycle—the division of the mother cell into two genetically identical daughter cells.[69] The cell cycle is a vital process by which a single-celled fertilized egg develops into a mature organism, as well as the process by which hair, skin, blood cells, and some internal organs are renewed. After cell division, each of the daughter cells begin the interphase of a new cycle. In contrast to mitosis, meiosis results in four haploid daughter cells by undergoing one round of DNA replication followed by two divisions.[70] Homologous chromosomes are separated in the first division (meiosis I), and sister chromatids are separated in the second division (meiosis II). Both of these cell division cycles are used in the process of sexual reproduction at some point in their life cycle. Both are believed to be present in the last eukaryotic common ancestor.

Prokaryotes (i.e., archaea and bacteria) can also undergo cell division (or binary fission). Unlike the processes of mitosis and meiosis in eukaryotes, binary fission takes in prokaryotes takes place without the formation of a spindle apparatus on the cell. Before binary fission, DNA in the bacterium is tightly coiled. After it has uncoiled and duplicated, it is pulled to the separate poles of the bacterium as it increases the size to prepare for splitting. Growth of a new cell wall begins to separate the bacterium (triggered by FtsZ polymerization and "Z-ring" formation)[71] The new cell wall (septum) fully develops, resulting in the complete split of the bacterium. The new daughter cells have tightly coiled DNA rods, ribosomes, and plasmids.

Genetics
Inheritance
Further information: Classical genetics

Punnett square depicting a cross between two pea plants heterozygous for purple (B) and white (b) blossoms
Genetics is the scientific study of inheritance.[72][73][74] Mendelian inheritance, specifically, is the process by which genes and traits are passed on from parents to offspring.[32] It was formulated by Gregor Mendel, based on his work with pea plants in the mid-nineteenth century. Mendel established several principles of inheritance. The first is that genetic characteristics, which are now called alleles, are discrete and have alternate forms (e.g., purple vs. white or tall vs. dwarf), each inherited from one of two parents. Based on his law of dominance and uniformity, which states that some alleles are dominant while others are recessive; an organism with at least one dominant allele will display the phenotype of that dominant allele.[75] Exceptions to this rule include penetrance and expressivity.[32] Mendel noted that during gamete formation, the alleles for each gene segregate from each other so that each gamete carries only one allele for each gene, which is stated by his law of segregation. Heterozygotic individuals produce gametes with an equal frequency of two alleles. Finally, Mendel formulated the law of independent assortment, which states that genes of different traits can segregate independently during the formation of gametes, i.e., genes are unlinked. An exception to this rule would include traits that are sex-linked. Test crosses can be performed to experimentally determine the underlying genotype of an organism with a dominant phenotype.[76] A Punnett square can be used to predict the results of a test cross. The chromosome theory of inheritance, which states that genes are found on chromosomes, was supported by Thomas Morgans's experiments with fruit flies, which established the sex linkage between eye color and sex in these insects.[77] In humans and other mammals (e.g., dogs), it is not feasible or practical to conduct test cross experiments. Instead, pedigrees, which are genetic representations of family trees,[78] are used instead to trace the inheritance of a specific trait or disease through multiple generations.[79]

DNA

Bases lie between two spiraling DNA strands.
A gene is a unit of heredity that corresponds to a region of deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) that carries genetic information that influences the form or function of an organism in specific ways. DNA is a molecule composed of two polynucleotide chains that coil around each other to form a double helix, which was first described by James Watson and Francis Crick in 1953.[80] It is found as linear chromosomes in eukaryotes, and circular chromosomes in prokaryotes. A chromosome is an organized structure consisting of DNA and histones. The set of chromosomes in a cell and any other hereditary information found in the mitochondria, chloroplasts, or other locations is collectively known as a cell's genome. In eukaryotes, genomic DNA is localized in the cell nucleus, or with small amounts in mitochondria and chloroplasts.[81] In prokaryotes, the DNA is held within an irregularly shaped body in the cytoplasm called the nucleoid.[82] The genetic information in a genome is held within genes, and the complete assemblage of this information in an organism is called its genotype.[83] Genes encode the information needed by cells for the synthesis of proteins, which in turn play a central role in influencing the final phenotype of the organism.

The two polynucleotide strands that make up DNA run in opposite directions to each other and are thus antiparallel. Each strand is composed of nucleotides,[84][85] with each nucleotide containing one of four nitrogenous bases (cytosine [C], guanine [G], adenine [A] or thymine [T]), a sugar called deoxyribose, and a phosphate group. The nucleotides are joined to one another in a chain by covalent bonds between the sugar of one nucleotide and the phosphate of the next, resulting in an alternating sugar-phosphate backbone. It is the sequence of these four bases along the backbone that encodes genetic information. Bases of the two polynucleotide strands are bound together by hydrogen bonds, according to base pairing rules (A with T and C with G), to make double-stranded DNA. The bases are divided into two groups: pyrimidines and purines. In DNA, the pyrimidines are thymine and cytosine whereas the purines are adenine and guanine.

There are grooves that run along the entire length of the double helix due to the uneven spacing of the DNA strands relative to each other.[80] Both grooves differ in size, with the major groove being larger and therefore more accessible to the binding of proteins than the minor groove.[80] The outer edges of the bases are exposed to these grooves and are therefore accessible for additional hydrogen bonding.[80] Because each groove can have two possible base-pair configurations (G-C and A-T), there are four possible base-pair configurations within the entire double helix, each of which is chemically distinct from another.[80] As a result, protein molecules are able to recognize and bind to specific base-pair sequences, which is the basis of specific DNA-protein interactions.

DNA replication is a semiconservative process whereby each strand serves as a template for a new strand of DNA.[80] The process begins with the unwounding of the double helix at an origin of replication, which separates the two strands, thereby making them available as two templates. This is then followed by the binding of the enzyme primase to the template to synthesize a starter RNA (or DNA in some viruses) strand called a primer from the 5’ to 3’ location.[80] Once the primer is completed, the primase is released from the template, followed by the binding of the enzyme DNA polymerase to the same template to synthesize new DNA. The rate of DNA replication in a living cell was measured as 749 nucleotides added per second under ideal conditions.[86]

DNA replication is not perfect as the DNA polymerase sometimes insert bases that are not complementary to the template (e.g., putting in A in the strand opposite to G in the template strand).[80] In eukaryotes, the initial error or mutation rate is about 1 in 100,000.[80] Proofreading and mismatch repair are the two mechanisms that repair these errors, which reduces the mutation rate to 10−10, particularly before and after a cell cycle.[80]

Mutations are heritable changes in DNA.[80] They can arise spontaneously as a result of replication errors that were not corrected by proofreading or can be induced by an environmental mutagen such as a chemical (e.g., nitrous acid, benzopyrene) or radiation (e.g., x-ray, gamma ray, ultraviolet radiation, particles emitted by unstable isotopes).[80] Mutations can appear as a change in single base or at a larger scale involving chromosomal mutations such as deletions, inversions, or translocations.[80]

In multicellular organisms, mutations can occur in somatic or germline cells.[80] In somatic cells, the mutations are passed on to daughter cells during mitosis.[80] In a germline cell such as a sperm or an egg, the mutation will appear in an organism at fertilization.[80] Mutations can lead to several types of phenotypic effects such as silent, loss-of-function, gain-of-function, and conditional mutations.[80]

Some mutations can be beneficial, as they are a source of genetic variation for evolution.[80] Others can be harmful if they were to result in a loss of function of genes needed for survival.[80] Mutagens such as carcinogens are typically avoided as a matter of public health policy goals.[80] One example is the banning of chlorofluorocarbons (CFC) by the Montreal Protocol, as CFCs tend to deplete the ozone layer, resulting in more ultraviolet radiation from the sun passing through the Earth's upper atmosphere, thereby causing somatic mutations that can lead to skin cancer.[80] Similarly, smoking bans have been enforced throughout the world in an effort to reduce the incidence of lung cancer.[80]

Gene expression

The extended central dogma of molecular biology includes all the processes involved in the flow of genetic information.
Gene expression is the molecular process by which a genotype gives rise to a phenotype, i.e., observable trait. The genetic information stored in DNA represents the genotype, whereas the phenotype results from the synthesis of proteins that control an organism's structure and development, or that act as enzymes catalyzing specific metabolic pathways. This process is summarized by the central dogma of molecular biology, which was formulated by Francis Crick in 1958.[87][88][89] According to the Central Dogma, genetic information flows from DNA to RNA to protein. Hence, there are two gene expression processes: transcription (DNA to RNA) and translation (RNA to protein).[90] These processes are used by all life—eukaryotes (including multicellular organisms), prokaryotes (bacteria and archaea), and are exploited by viruses—to generate the macromolecular machinery for life.

During transcription, messenger RNA (mRNA) strands are created using DNA strands as a template, which is initiated when RNA polymerase binds to a DNA sequence called a promoter, which instructs the RNA to begin transcription of one of the two DNA strands.[91] The DNA bases are exchanged for their corresponding bases except in the case of thymine (T), for which RNA substitutes uracil (U).[92] In eukaryotes, a large part of DNA (e.g., >98% in humans) contain non-coding called introns, which do not serve as patterns for protein sequences. The coding regions or exons are interspersed along with the introns in the primary transcript (or pre-mRNA).[91] Before translation, the pre-mRNA undergoes further processing whereby the introns are removed (or spliced out), leaving only the spliced exons in the mature mRNA strand.[91]

The translation of mRNA to protein occurs in ribosomes, whereby the transcribed mRNA strand specifies the sequence of amino acids within proteins using the genetic code. Gene products are often proteins, but in non-protein-coding genes such as transfer RNA (tRNA) and small nuclear RNA (snRNA), the product is a functional non-coding RNA.[93][94]

Gene regulation

Regulation of various stages of gene expression
The regulation of gene expression (or gene regulation) by environmental factors and during different stages of development can occur at each step of the process such as transcription, RNA splicing, translation, and post-translational modification of a protein.[95]

The ability of gene transcription to be regulated allows for the conservation of energy as cells will only make proteins when needed.[95] Gene expression can be influenced by positive or negative regulation, depending on which of the two types of regulatory proteins called transcription factors bind to the DNA sequence close to or at a promoter.[95] A cluster of genes that share the same promoter is called an operon, found mainly in prokaryotes and some lower eukaryotes (e.g., Caenorhabditis elegans).[95][96] It was first identified in Escherichia coli—a prokaryotic cell that can be found in the intestines of humans and other animals—in the 1960s by François Jacob and Jacques Monod.[95] They studied the prokaryotic cell's lac operon, which is part of three genes (lacZ, lacY, and lacA) that encode three lactose-metabolizing enzymes (β-galactosidase, β-galactoside permease, and β-galactoside transacetylase).[95] In positive regulation of gene expression, the activator is the transcription factor that stimulates transcription when it binds to the sequence near or at the promoter. In contrast, negative regulation occurs when another transcription factor called a repressor binds to a DNA sequence called an operator, which is part of an operon, to prevent transcription. When a repressor binds to a repressible operon (e.g., trp operon), it does so only in the presence of a corepressor. Repressors can be inhibited by compounds called inducers (e.g., allolactose), which exert their effects by binding to a repressor to prevent it from binding to an operator, thereby allowing transcription to occur.[95] Specific genes that can be activated by inducers are called inducible genes (e.g., lacZ or lacA in E. coli), which are in contrast to constitutive genes that are almost always active.[95] In contrast to both, structural genes encode proteins that are not involved in gene regulation.[95]

In prokaryotic cells, transcription is regulated by proteins called sigma factors, which bind to RNA polymerase and direct it to specific promoters.[95] Similarly, transcription factors in eukaryotic cells can also coordinate the expression of a group of genes, even if the genes themselves are located on different chromosomes.[95] Coordination of these genes can occur as long as they share the same regulatory DNA sequence that bind to the same transcription factors.[95] Promoters in eukaryotic cells are more diverse but tend to contain a core sequence that RNA polymerase can bind to, with the most common sequence being the TATA box, which contains multiple repeating A and T bases.[95] Specifically, RNA polymerase II is the RNA polymerase that binds to a promoter to initiate transcription of protein-coding genes in eukaryotes, but only in the presence of multiple general transcription factors, which are distinct from the transcription factors that have regulatory effects, i.e., activators and repressors.[95] In eukaryotic cells, DNA sequences that bind with activators are called enhances whereas those sequences that bind with repressors are called silencers.[95] Transcription factors such as nuclear factor of activated T-cells (NFAT) are able to identify specific nucleotide sequence based on the base sequence (e.g., CGAGGAAAATTG for NFAT) of the binding site, which determines the arrangement of the chemical groups within that sequence that allows for specific DNA-protein interactions.[95] The expression of transcription factors is what underlies cellular differentiation in a developing embryo.[95]

In addition to regulatory events involving the promoter, gene expression can also be regulated by epigenetic changes to chromatin, which is a complex of DNA and protein found in eukaryotic cells.[95]

Post-transcriptional control of mRNA can involve the alternative splicing of primary mRNA transcripts, resulting in a single gene giving rise to different mature mRNAs that encode a family of different proteins.[95][97] A well-studied example is the Sxl gene in Drosophila, which determines the sex in these animals. The gene itself contains four exons and alternative splicing of its pre-mRNA transcript can generate two active forms of the Sxl protein in female flies and one in inactive form of the protein in males.[95] Another example is the human immunodeficiency virus (HIV), which has a single pre-mRNA transcript that can generate up to nine proteins as a result of alternative splicing.[95] In humans, eighty percent of all 21,000 genes are alternatively spliced.[95] Given that both chimpanzees and humans have a similar number of genes, it is thought that alternative splicing might have contributed to the latter's complexity due to the greater number of alternative splicing in the human brain than in the brain of chimpanzees.[95]

Translation can be regulated in three known ways, one of which involves the binding of tiny RNA molecules called microRNA (miRNA) to a target mRNA transcript, which inhibits its translation and causes it to degrade.[95] Translation can also be inhibited by the modification of the 5’ cap by substituting the modified guanosine triphosphate (GTP) at the 5’ end of an mRNA for an unmodified GTP molecule.[95] Finally, translational repressor proteins can bind to mRNAs and prevent them from attaching to a ribosome, thereby blocking translation.[95]

Once translated, the stability of proteins can be regulated by being targeted for degradation.[95] A common example is when an enzyme attaches a regulatory protein called ubiquitin to the lysine residue of a targeted protein.[95] Other ubiquitins then attached to the primary ubiquitin to form a polyubiquitinated protein, which then enters a much larger protein complex called proteasome.[95] Once the polyubiquitinated protein enters the proteasome, the polyubiquitin detaches from the target protein, which is unfolded by the proteasome in an ATP-dependent manner, allowing it to be hydrolyzed by three proteases.[95]