Animal diversity
Further information: Zoology

Diversity of animals. From top to bottom, first column: Echinoderm, cnidaria, bivalve, tardigrade, crustacean, and arachnid. Second column: Sponge, insect, mammal, bryozoa, acanthocephala, and flatworm. Third column: Cephalopod, annelid, tunicate, fish, bird, and phoronida.
Animals are multicellular eukaryotic organisms that form the kingdom Animalia. With few exceptions, animals consume organic material, breathe oxygen, are able to move, can reproduce sexually, and grow from a hollow sphere of cells, the blastula, during embryonic development. Over 1.5 million living animal species have been described—of which around 1 million are insects—but it has been estimated there are over 7 million animal species in total. They have complex interactions with each other and their environments, forming intricate food webs.

Animals can be distinguished into two groups based on their developmental characteristics.[184] For instance, embryos of diploblastic animals such as ctenophores, placeozoans, and cnidarians have two cell layers (ectoderm and endoderm) whereas the embryos of triploblastic animals have three tissue layers (ectoderm, mesoderm, and endoderm), which is a synapomorphy of these animals.[184] Triploblastic animals can be further divided into two major clades based on based on the pattern of gastrulation, whereby a cavity called a blastopore is formed from the indentation of a blastula. In protostomes, the blastopore gives rise to the mouth, which is then followed by the formation of the anus.[184] In deuterostomes, the blastopore gives rise to the anus, followed by the formation of the mouth.[184]

Animals can also be differentiated based on their body plan, specifically with respect to four key features: symmetry, body cavity, segmentation, and appendages.[184] The bodies of most animals are symmetrical, with symmetry being either radial or bilateral.[184] Triploblastic animals can be divided into three types based on their body cavity: acoelomate, pseudocoelomate, and coelomate.[184] Segmentation can be observed in the bodies of many animals, which allows for specialization of different parts of the body as well as allowing the animal to change the shape of its body to control its movements.[184] Finally, animals can be distinguished based on the type and location of their appendages such as antennae for sensing the environment or claws for capturing prey.[184]

Sponges, the members of the phylum Porifera, are a basal Metazoa (animal) clade as a sister of the diploblasts.[185][186][187][188][189] They are multicellular organisms that have bodies full of pores and channels allowing water to circulate through them, consisting of jelly-like mesohyl sandwiched between two thin layers of cells.

The majority (~97%) of animal species are invertebrates,[190] which are animals that do not have a vertebral column (or backbone or spine), derived from the notochord. This includes all animals apart from the subphylum Vertebrata. Familiar examples of invertebrates include sponges, cnidarians (hydras, jellyfishes, sea anemones, and corals), mollusks (chitons, snail, bivalves, squids, and octopuses), annelids (earthworms and leeches), and arthropods (insects, arachnids, crustaceans, and myriapods). Many invertebrate taxa have a greater number and variety of species than the entire subphylum of Vertebrata.[191]

In contrast, vertebrates comprise all species of animals within the subphylum Vertebrata, which are chordates with vertebral columns. These animals have four key features, which are an anterior skull with a brain, a rigid internal skeleton supported by a vertebral column that encloses a spinal cord, internal organs suspended in a coelom, and a well-developed circulatory system driven by a single large heart.[184] Vertebrates represent the overwhelming majority of the phylum Chordata, with currently about 69,963 species described.[192] Vertebrates comprise different major groups that include jawless fishes (not including hagfishes), jawed vertebrates such as cartilaginous fishes (sharks, rays, and ratfish), bony fishes, tetrapods such as amphibians, reptiles, birds, and mammals.[184]

The two remaining groups of jawless fishes that have survived beyond the Devonian period are hagfishes and lamprey, which are collectively known as cyclostomes (for circled mouths).[184] Both groups of animals have elongated eel-like bodies with no paired fins.[184] However, because hagfishes have a weak circulatory system with three accessory hearts, a partial skull with no cerebellum, no jaws or stomach, and no jointed vertebrae, some biologists do not classify them as vertebrates but instead as a sister group of vertebrates.[184] In contrast, lampreys have a complete skull and a distinct vertebrae that is cartilaginous.[184]

Mammals have four key features that distinguish them from other animals such as sweat glands, mammary glands, hair, and a four-chambered heart.[184] Small and medium-sized mammals used to co-exist with large dinosaurs in much of the Mesozoic era but soon radiated following the mass extinction of dinosaurs at the end of the Cretaceous period.[184] There are approximately 57,000 mammal species, which can be divided into two primary groups: prototherians and therians. Prototherians do not possess nipples on their mammary but instead secrete milk onto their skin, allowing their offspring to lap if off their furs.[184] They also lack a placenta, lays eggs, and have sprawling legs. Currently, there only five known species of prototherians (platypus and four species of echidnas).[184] The therian clade is viviparous and can be further divided into two groups: marsupials and eutherians.[184] Marsupial females have a ventral pouch to carry and feed their offspring. Eutherians form the majority of mammals and include major groups such as rodents, bats, even-toed ungulates and cetaceans, shrews and moles, primates, carnivores, rabbits, African insectivores, spiny insectivores, armadillos, treeshrews, odd-toed ungulates, long-nosed insectivores, anteaters and sloths, pangolins, hyraxes, sirenians, elephants, colugos, and aardvark.[184]
Bacteriophages attached to a bacterial cell wall
Viruses are submicroscopic infectious agents that replicate inside the cells of organisms.[193] Viruses infect all types of life forms, from animals and plants to microorganisms, including bacteria and archaea.[194][195] More than 6,000 virus species have been described in detail.[196] Viruses are found in almost every ecosystem on Earth and are the most numerous type of biological entity.[197][198]

When infected, a host cell is forced to rapidly produce thousands of identical copies of the original virus. When not inside an infected cell or in the process of infecting a cell, viruses exist in the form of independent particles, or virions, consisting of the genetic material (DNA or RNA), a protein coat called capsid, and in some cases an outside envelope of lipids. The shapes of these virus particles range from simple helical and icosahedral forms to more complex structures. Most virus species have virions too small to be seen with an optical microscope, as they are one-hundredth the size of most bacteria.

The origins of viruses in the evolutionary history of life are unclear: some may have evolved from plasmids—pieces of DNA that can move between cells—while others may have evolved from bacteria. In evolution, viruses are an important means of horizontal gene transfer, which increases genetic diversity in a way analogous to sexual reproduction.[199] Because viruses possess some but not all characteristics of life, they have been described as "organisms at the edge of life",[200] and as self-replicators.[201]

Viruses can spread in many ways. One transmission pathway is through disease-bearing organisms known as vectors: for example, viruses are often transmitted from plant to plant by insects that feed on plant sap, such as aphids; and viruses in animals can be carried by blood-sucking insects. Influenza viruses are spread by coughing and sneezing. Norovirus and rotavirus, common causes of viral gastroenteritis, are transmitted by the faecal–oral route, passed by hand-to-mouth contact or in food or water. Viral infections in animals provoke an immune response that usually eliminates the infecting virus. Immune responses can also be produced by vaccines, which confer an artificially acquired immunity to the specific viral infection.

Plant form and function
Plant body
Further information: Plant morphology, Plant anatomy, and Plant physiology

Root and shoot systems in a eudicot
The plant body is made up of organs that can be organized into two major organ systems: a root system and a shoot system.[202] The root system anchors the plants into place. The roots themselves absorb water and minerals and store photosynthetic products. The shoot system is composed of stem, leaves, and flowers. The stems hold and orient the leaves to the sun, which allow the leaves to conduct photosynthesis. The flowers are shoots that have been modified for reproduction. Shoots are composed of phytomers, which are functional units that consist of a node carrying one or more leaves, internode, and one or more buds.

A plant body has two basic patterns (apical–basal and radial axes) that been established during embryogenesis.[202] Cells and tissues are arranged along the apical-basal axis from root to shoot whereas the three tissue systems (dermal, ground, and vascular) that make up a plant's body are arranged concentrically around its radial axis.[202] The dermal tissue system forms the epidermis (or outer covering) of a plant, which is usually a single cell layer that consists of cells that have differentiated into three specialized structures: stomata for gas exchange in leaves, trichomes (or leaf hair) for protection against insects and solar radiation, and root hairs for increased surface areas and absorption of water and nutrients. The ground tissue makes up virtually all the tissue that lies between the dermal and vascular tissues in the shoots and roots. It consists of three cell types: Parenchyma, collenchyma, and sclerenchyma cells. Finally, the vascular tissues are made up of two constituent tissues: xylem and phloem. The xylem is made up of two conducting cells called tracheids and vessel elements whereas the phloem is characterized by the presence of sieve tube elements and companion cells.[202]